Learned LSM-trees: Two Approaches Using Learned
Bloom Filters∗
Nico Fidalgo Puyuan Ye
Harvard University
nfidalgo@college.harvard.edu, puyuanye@college.harvard.edu
May 9, 2025
Abstract
Modern key-value stores rely heavily on Log-Structured Merge (LSM) trees for write optimization, but this design introduces significant read amplification. Auxiliary structures like
Bloom filters help, but impose memory costs that scale with tree depth and dataset size. Recent advances in learned data structures suggest that machine learning models can augment or
replace these components, trading handcrafted heuristics for data-adaptive behavior. In this
work, we explore two approaches for integrating learned predictions into the LSM-tree lookup
path. The first uses a classifier to selectively bypass Bloom filter probes for irrelevant levels,
aiming to reduce average-case query latency. The second replaces traditional Bloom filters with
compact learned models and small backup filters, targeting memory footprint reduction without
compromising correctness.
We implement both methods atop a Monkey-style LSM-tree with leveled compaction, perlevel Bloom filters, and realistic workloads. Our experiments show that the classifier reduces
GET latency by up to 2.28× by skipping over 30% of Bloom filter checks with high precision,
though it incurs a modest false-negative rate. The learned Bloom filter design achieves zero
false negatives and retains baseline latency while cutting memory usage per level by 70–80%.
Together, these designs illustrate complementary trade-offs between latency, memory, and correctness, and highlight the potential of learned index components in write-optimized storage
systems.
1 Introduction
Log-structured merge trees (LSM-trees) have become the de facto standard for high-throughput
write-heavy workloads in modern key-value stores such as RocksDB, Cassandra, and LevelDB.
Their core strength lies in write amplification reduction: rather than writing directly to disk on
each update, writes are first buffered in memory (in the MemTable), and later flushed as immutable,
sorted disk segments known as SSTables. These SSTables are organized hierarchically across levels, each exponentially larger than the last, using a compaction strategy that periodically merges
overlapping tables to maintain sorted order and free space. This batching and merging architecture
drastically improves write throughput, making LSM-trees ideal for large-scale logging, time-series
data, and streaming ingestion applications.
Yet this write-optimized design creates a well-known tradeoff: increased read latency. Point
queries (GET operations) must examine the MemTable and potentially every level of the disk
∗Code available at: https://github.com/fiidalgo/predictive-lsm-trees
1
arXiv:2508.00882v1 [cs.DS] 24 Jul 2025
hierarchy, querying filters and scanning SSTables. The deeper the level hierarchy, the greater the
number of SSTables, and thus the more auxiliary data structures are required to ensure acceptable
read performance. Bloom filters and fence pointers are the most common of these. Bloom filters
prevent unnecessary I/O by probabilistically excluding levels, and fence pointers accelerate binary
search within an SSTable. However, these structures impose substantial memory overhead and
have limited adaptivity, especially as datasets grow and key distributions evolve.
In response to these challenges, a new class of techniques has emerged: learned data structures.
Rooted in the idea of algorithms with predictions, these approaches use machine learning models
to approximate, augment, or replace traditional data structures. For example, a classifier can
predict whether a key exists in a level, or whether a key is likely to be in the dataset at all. Such
predictions can reduce memory consumption, avoid redundant filter checks, and skip entire levels,
thereby reducing query latency.
In this project, we explore two approaches for integrating learned predictions into LSM-tree
read paths. First, we propose a classifier-based method that predicts whether a given key is likely
to reside in each level. Instead of querying every Bloom filter sequentially, we use the classifier
to selectively consult only the most promising levels. This avoids wasted memory accesses and
reduces average lookup latency in multi-level trees. Second, we implement a learned Bloom filter,
replacing large traditional Bloom filters with compact hybrid structures consisting of a lightweight
classifier and a small backup Bloom filter. This approach offers substantial memory savings while
still preserving correctness guarantees.
To rigorously test these ideas, we constructed an LSM-tree implementation based on the design
choices of the Monkey paper [3], including leveled compaction, a 10x level size ratio, and realistic
SSTable thresholds. We simulate workloads using 287.6 MB of randomly generated data with 16-
byte keys and 100-byte values to emulate RocksDB conditions and avoid overfitting to artificial
patterns. Our experiments span a diverse set of read-intensive scenarios (random access, sequential
scans, and level-specific lookups) to examine how learned models behave under varying access
distributions.
These contributions demonstrate the practical viability of integrating ML-based predictions
into critical paths of database storage engines. Our findings offer a compelling case for memoryefficient, prediction-aware auxiliary structures that optimize LSM-tree query performance without
compromising correctness. This work adds to a growing body of literature at the intersection of
data systems, algorithms, and machine learning, where classical structures are being reimagined as
adaptive, data-driven components.
2 Related Work
The idea of enhancing traditional data structures with machine learning was catalyzed by the
seminal work of Kraska et al. [5] in “The Case for Learned Index Structures.” This work argued
that core components of databases (e.g., B-trees, hash maps, and Bloom filters) can be replaced
or augmented with models trained to exploit regularities in real-world data distributions. The key
insight was that fixed data structures are agnostic to input distributions, while learned models
can adaptively leverage them to reduce space and time complexity. This marked the beginning
of a broader research trend toward learned data structures, with a growing focus on replacing
deterministic components with adaptive, data-driven approximations.
This idea was extended to Bloom filters by Mitzenmacher [6], who introduced the sandwich
learned Bloom filter. In this design, a machine learning classifier first predicts whether a key
belongs to a set. If the classifier accepts the key, a backup traditional Bloom filter is queried to verify
2
membership, ensuring that false negatives (which traditional Bloom filters avoid by design) are not
introduced. This hybrid structure preserved correctness while significantly reducing memory usage.
Our work builds on this framework by applying it to a realistic, multi-level LSM-tree, incorporating
classifiers at the level granularity, and empirically evaluating performance across diverse workloads.
The concept of learned Bloom filters was further developed in follow-up studies such as AdaBF [2], which introduced adaptivity into the classifier itself, allowing the filter to change over time
as data distributions evolved. Meanwhile, Rae et al. [8] proposed neural Bloom filters using deep
learning architectures to model complex patterns in key distributions. While these techniques
achieved strong empirical results, most prior work tested them on static datasets or in isolation
from real systems. Our project addresses this gap by deeply integrating learned filters into a full
LSM-tree pipeline and evaluating their behavior in dynamic, hierarchical environments.
Parallel to these empirical advancements, theoretical work emerged under the banner of “Algorithms with Predictions.” Mitzenmacher and Vassilvitskii formalized how algorithms can safely
incorporate ML predictions while maintaining worst-case performance bounds [7]. The core idea
is to use predictions to improve average-case efficiency, while ensuring robustness through fallback
mechanisms that guard against poor predictions. This principle guided our classifier-based design:
we allow the model to skip levels when confident, but always revert to Bloom filter fallback when
uncertain or incorrect. This interplay between data adaptivity and algorithmic resilience is central
to making machine learning a dependable component in critical database infrastructure.
In the domain of key-value stores, the Monkey paper by Dayan et al. [3] presented a comprehensive mathematical framework for optimizing LSM-tree compaction strategies, Bloom filter
allocation, and level sizing. It demonstrated that disproportionate Bloom filter memory allocations
could yield significant performance improvements and introduced a log-log cost model for understanding read amplification. We adopt the Monkey configuration in our implementation—1 MB
MemTable, 10x size ratio, leveled compaction—to ground our system in an industry-relevant and
theoretically sound baseline. Our learned models can be seen as a next step in this optimization
lineage, where instead of tuning filter sizes, we explore adaptive structures that may change the
nature of filtering itself.
Other relevant studies, such as Kipf et al.’s learned replacements for B-trees [4], and Tsai et
al.’s learned hash tables [9], further established that learned approaches can outperform classical
structures in space and latency across a range of domains. However, relatively few works have
explored learned components in hierarchical storage systems like LSM-trees, where predictions
affect not just access efficiency but the traversal path of the entire system.
In summary, our project synthesizes ideas from theoretical frameworks (algorithms with predictions), empirical explorations (learned filters and classifiers), and practical systems (Monkey-style
LSM-trees). We offer a real-world testbed where these ideas interact meaningfully, measuring not
only prediction accuracy but also memory usage, latency, and false negative rates under varying
workloads. This positions our work as both a validation of prior results and a stepping stone for
future research on hybrid learned/traditional data systems.
3 Background
3.1 LSM-trees and the Read-Write Tradeoff
Log-Structured Merge Trees (LSM-trees) are widely used in modern key-value stores due to their
write-optimized nature. They delay disk writes by buffering updates in a memory-resident data
structure, typically a skip list, known as the MemTable. Once this buffer exceeds a fixed threshold—in our case, 1 MB as suggested by configurations in the Monkey paper—it is flushed to disk
3
as an immutable, sorted structure called a Sorted String Table (SSTable).
SSTables are organized into levels L0, L1, . . . , Ln, with each level increasing exponentially in
size relative to the one above it. The size ratio T is typically set to 10, a choice that is not theoretically mandated but is justified by empirical systems research as a balance between compaction
cost, space amplification, and query performance [3]. Compaction, a background process, merges
overlapping SSTables from higher levels into lower ones to maintain sorted order and reduce storage
fragmentation. This architectural design minimizes write amplification and significantly improves
throughput compared to B-trees and other write-in-place structures.
However, this benefit comes at the cost of read amplification. For point queries, the system must
check the MemTable, and potentially each level of the tree from newest to oldest. To mitigate this
cost, LSM-trees incorporate auxiliary indexing structures such as Bloom filters and fence pointers.
Bloom filters help quickly determine whether a key is absent from a given level, and fence pointers
assist in narrowing the range of disk pages to inspect.
The Monkey paper [3] rigorously models this tradeoff and shows that optimal read performance
cannot be achieved with uniformly configured Bloom filters. Instead, it introduces a novel cost
model in which the expected query cost R is given by:
R =
X
L
i=1
fi
· ci
where fi
is the false positive rate (FPR) of the Bloom filter at level i, and ci
is the cost of probing
level i. The paper demonstrates that minimizing R requires distributing memory non-uniformly:
deeper levels, which are more expensive to query and less likely to be accessed, should be allocated
more bits per key. Monkey prescribes a log-uniform FPR distribution where:
fi ∝
1
Ti
This transforms the Bloom filter configuration problem into a constrained convex optimization
problem. Given a total filter memory budget M, one solves for the bits per key mi such that:
X
L
i=1
ni
· mi ≤ M
where ni
is the number of keys in level i. This allocation minimizes expected read cost while
respecting memory constraints.
Our project directly adopts the Monkey framework, using a 1 MB MemTable, a 10x level size
ratio, leveled compaction, and per-level Bloom filters starting at L1. These choices ensure empirical
comparability and provide a mathematically grounded baseline for evaluating the impact of learned
predictions.
3.2 Bloom Filters and Their Limitations
Bloom filters, introduced by Bloom in 1970 [1], are widely used for fast set membership queries.
Each Bloom filter uses a bit array of size m and k independent hash functions. For each key
inserted, the corresponding k bits are set to 1. To query a key, one checks whether all k hash bits
are set. If any bit is 0, the key is definitely not in the set; if all are 1, the key may be present. The
false positive rate is approximately:
FPR ≈

1 − e
−kn/mk
4
This expression is derived under the assumption of perfectly random hash functions and uniform
key distribution. The FPR is minimized when:
k =
m
n
ln 2
In this case, the minimum FPR becomes:
FPRmin =

1
2
k
These derivations are foundational results from Bloom’s original formulation [1], and remain the
theoretical basis for Bloom filter tuning in practice.
Despite their probabilistic power, traditional Bloom filters are static and oblivious to patterns
in key access or structure. They assume that all keys are equally likely and uniformly distributed,
which is rarely true in practice. Consequently, Bloom filters allocate the same number of bits per
key across all levels and key types, missing optimization opportunities.
This limitation is particularly pronounced in multi-level systems like LSM-trees, where deeper
levels contain exponentially more data due to geometric growth. For example, suppose Level 0
starts with 105 keys and each subsequent level is ten times larger (a standard size ratio T = 10).
Then by Level 5, the total number of keys stored across levels L1 to L5 is approximately 1.11×106
times the base level. If we allocate 10 bits per key in each Bloom filter, the total memory required
becomes:
X
5
i=1
(105
· 10i
) · 10 = 111,110,000 bits ≈ 13.89 MB
This linear growth in filter memory with respect to the number of levels and keys quickly becomes a
bottleneck, especially in large-scale deployments where each level may contain hundreds of millions
of keys.
3.3 Learned Bloom Filters and ML Classification Background
The motivation behind learned Bloom filters originates from the observation that traditional filters
waste memory treating all keys uniformly, ignoring patterns or correlations present in real-world
data. Learned Bloom filters exploit this by training a machine learning model f : K → [0, 1]
that estimates the likelihood of key membership in a dataset S ⊂ K. If f(x) exceeds a threshold
τ , the model predicts presence. To prevent false negatives—i.e., true members x ∈ S incorrectly
classified as non-members—a small backup Bloom filter stores false negatives found during training,
as introduced in Mitzenmacher’s sandwich filter [6].
Formally, let X be the universe of keys and let χS : X → {0, 1} be the true membership function.
A learned Bloom filter seeks to approximate χS using a trained model ˆχS, such that:
∀x ∈ X , χˆS(x) = (
1 if f(x) ≥ τ or x ∈ B
0 otherwise
where B denotes the set of false negatives caught by the backup filter.
The goal is to reduce the total space while preserving a comparable or better false positive rate
ϵ. If Mtraditional is the size of a standard Bloom filter, then the learned filter seeks to satisfy:
Mmodel + Mbackup ≪ Mtraditional
5
In our implementation, we use Gradient Boosted Trees (GBTs), an ensemble learning method
that minimizes the logistic loss:
L(y, yˆ) = − [y log(ˆy) + (1 − y) log(1 − yˆ)]
The final prediction is given by:
yˆ = σ
 X
T
t=1
αtht(x)
!
, where σ(z) = 1
1 + e−z
These models generalize well on small datasets and are efficient to evaluate.
We engineer features from keys using logarithmic transforms, trigonometric functions, digitbased statistics, modulo operations, and binary encodings. These help the classifier capture nonlinear patterns in key distributions and improve generalization.
In our classifier-based level prediction architecture we predict the level at which the key is most
likely to reside, and skip Bloom filters for levels predicted negative. This architecture reduces
unnecessary filter checks and memory reads.
Both learned approaches are instances of the broader theory of algorithms with predictions [7],
which blends ML predictions with robust fallback guarantees. Our use of backup filters and conservative thresholds ensures that our system maintains correctness even when predictions are inaccurate.
4 Design and Implementation
The central research question of this work is whether machine learning models can meaningfully
augment or replace Bloom filters in LSM-trees to reduce lookup cost or memory footprint without
compromising correctness. In this section, we present two such designs: a classifier-augmented
lookup mechanism that reduces unnecessary Bloom filter queries, and a learned Bloom filter structure that replaces traditional filters entirely. Both are derived directly from the theoretical and
empirical motivations outlined in Section 2 and Section 3. In particular, we anchor our design
decisions in the Monkey framework [3] and the sandwich learned Bloom filter model [6], while
preserving correctness guarantees as mandated by the algorithms with predictions framework [7].
4.1 ML Classifier Approach
Our first design augments the LSM-tree’s GET operation with a classifier that predicts, on a perlevel basis, whether a given key is likely to be found in that level. Traditionally, a point query
consults the MemTable, then queries every level’s Bloom filter sequentially until a match is found.
However, in a deep LSM-tree hierarchy, this often involves scanning levels where the key is almost
certainly absent. This incurs wasted computation—each Bloom filter lookup involves memory
reads—and adds latency, especially when filters are large. Our insight is that a model trained on
key-level membership can help skip irrelevant filters altogether, thereby reducing memory accesses
and potentially lowering query latency.
To implement this, we use a GradientBoostingClassifier that takes as input a vector of
features derived from the query key. The model was trained on labeled data collected from prior
GET and PUT operations, with the goal of predicting whether a key exists in a specific level.
The feature set is intentionally large and expressive to allow for generalization across key distributions. We include power transformations such as k
2 and k
3
, which allow the model to detect
6
non-linear growth patterns. Logarithmic features like log(k) and log(1 + k) help capture exponential relationships between keys and levels, especially useful in exponentially growing structures
like LSM-trees. Trigonometric features sin(k), cos(k),tan(k) encode periodic patterns and were
observed to be helpful in capturing hashed or cyclic key behavior. Digit-based features, including
digit sum and digit count, help distinguish key formats or groupings, while modulo operations and
binning identify modular clustering or partitioning artifacts. Finally, binary encodings such as
bitcount and leading-one counts extract low-level key structure from raw byte representations.
These features are combined into a dense vector and fed into a shallow gradient boosting
ensemble with 200 estimators, a maximum tree depth of 6, and a learning rate of 0.1. The model
outputs a binary decision ˆyi ∈ {0, 1} for each level i, where 1 indicates predicted presence. If the
model returns 1, the corresponding Bloom filter is queried; if 0, the level is skipped.
This approach assumes that the classifier can accurately identify levels that are unlikely to
contain the key, thereby reducing the number of memory accesses (for Bloom filter queries) and
lowering the expected number of disk I/Os. The performance gain is in latency rather than memory
usage—while the model introduces additional memory overhead (roughly 6 MB in our experiments),
it avoids querying several Bloom filters, which can each cost tens to hundreds of nanoseconds
per lookup. Moreover, this model operates as a non-intrusive drop-in layer. It does not modify
compaction, tree layout, or the Bloom filter implementation. This simplicity makes it particularly
attractive in systems where correctness and modularity are paramount.
Algorithm 1: Classifier-Augmented Lookup
Algorithm 1 Classifier-Augmented LSM-Tree GET
1: procedure ClassifierLSM-Tree-GET(k)
2: if k ∈ MemTable then
3: return MemTable[k]
4: end if
5: for i = 1 to L do
6: pi ← Classifieri(k)
7: if pi = 1 then
8: if BloomFilteri
.MayContain(k) then
9: if k found in SSTablei then
10: return SSTablei
[k]
11: end if
12: end if
13: end if
14: end for
15: return NULL
16: end procedure
4.2 Learned Bloom Filter Approach
The second design is a more structural rethinking of Bloom filters within the LSM-tree. Rather
than use a model to skip filters, we instead train a model to replace them. This is inspired directly
by the sandwich learned Bloom filter [6], where a machine learning model acts as the primary
membership check, and a small backup Bloom filter ensures that false negatives do not occur. This
hybrid model allows us to dramatically shrink the memory cost of the traditional Bloom filter while
retaining correctness guarantees.
7
To integrate this into the LSM-tree, we replaced the standard filter logic within the Run, Level,
and Tree classes. Each level maintains its own trained classifier fi
, which predicts whether a key
is in that level. If the model returns true, we search the SSTables as normal. If the model returns
false, we consult the backup Bloom filter—constructed only on the model’s false negatives—to avoid
erroneous rejections. The backup Bloom filter is small because it only needs to store a fraction δ
of the total keys, where δ is the model’s false negative rate.
The key advantage of this approach is reduced memory usage. Whereas traditional Bloom
filters might use 10–14 bits per key, our model uses under 1 MB per level, and the backup filter
scales linearly with δ. For a model with δ = 0.01, the memory required for the backup is just 1%
of that used in the standard Bloom filter. While model inference does add latency, it is typically
on par with or faster than hashing-based Bloom filter queries. This makes the design especially
compelling in memory-constrained environments such as mobile databases, edge devices, or very
large-scale key-value stores.
Algorithm 2: Learned Bloom Filter Lookup
Algorithm 2 Learned Bloom Filter GET
1: procedure LearnedBF-LSM-Tree-GET(k)
2: if k ∈ MemTable then
3: return MemTable[k]
4: end if
5: for i = 1 to L do
6: pi ← Classifieri(k)
7: if pi = 1 then
8: if k found in SSTablei then
9: return SSTablei
[k]
10: end if
11: else if BackupFilteri
.MayContain(k) then
12: if k found in SSTablei then
13: return SSTablei
[k]
14: end if
15: end if
16: end for
17: return NULL
18: end procedure
4.3 Baseline Algorithm: Traditional LSM-tree Lookup
For completeness, we restate the standard lookup mechanism of a traditional LSM-tree using Bloom
filters at each level. This algorithm forms our baseline for all empirical comparisons.
Algorithm 3: Standard Lookup Procedure
8
Algorithm 3 Standard LSM-Tree GET Procedure
1: procedure LSM-Tree-GET(k)
2: if k ∈ MemTable then
3: return MemTable[k]
4: end if
5: for i = 1 to L do
6: if BloomFilteri
.MayContain(k) then
7: if k found in SSTablei then
8: return SSTablei
[k]
9: end if
10: end if
11: end for
12: return NULL
13: end procedure
This version ensures correctness and is relatively efficient when Bloom filters are finely tuned,
as proposed in Monkey [3]. However, it suffers from the inability to skip unpromising levels or
compress filter representation, which motivates our two proposed alternatives.
4.4 Design Tradeoffs and Comparative Summary
The classifier-augmented approach is targeted toward latency reduction. It reduces the number of
Bloom filters queried per lookup, potentially skipping deep levels with large filters and cold data.
However, it requires additional memory for the model and richer features, and its improvements
depend on prediction accuracy. In our implementation, this approach added between 5.6–6.1 MB
of memory overhead due to the high-capacity model and 45 engineered features, but this tradeoff
was justified in read-heavy environments where every skipped Bloom filter can shave off dozens of
nanoseconds per query.
By contrast, the learned Bloom filter approach is focused on reducing memory consumption.
It replaces large filters with compact models and small backups, enabling scalability in memoryconstrained deployments. The classifier in this design is shallower, uses fewer features, and results
in a smaller memory footprint (typically 530–903 KB per level). However, it may incur slightly
higher lookup latencies due to the need for fallback logic and two-stage validation (model + backup
Bloom filter). Nonetheless, because only the false negatives from the model are stored in the backup
Bloom filter, the total space consumed remains significantly below that of a traditional Bloom filter
while still preserving correctness.
Together, these designs explore two complementary paths in the design space of ML-enhanced
storage systems: predictive augmentation and learned replacement. Each draws from the framework
of algorithms with predictions and the broader movement toward data-adaptive system components.
Our implementation enables an empirical comparison of these approaches under realistic workloads,
validating their tradeoffs and limitations in practice.
We summarize the key distinctions and benefits of each design in Table 1, which provides a
structured overview of their integration complexity, memory footprint, performance goals, and
ideal deployment contexts.
9
Table 1: Comparison of the ML Classifier and Learned Bloom Filter Designs
Dimension ML Classifier (Filter Skipping)
Learned Bloom Filter (Hybrid
Replacement)
Goal Reduce query latency by skipping
unnecessary Bloom filter probes.
Reduce memory usage by replacing large Bloom filters with compact models and small backups.
Integration Depth Shallow—acts as a wrapper before Bloom filters, does not change
LSM-tree structure.
Deep—modifies level and run logic,
requires architectural changes to
the LSM-tree.
Model Size Larger (5.6–6.1 MB), due to 45 engineered features and high model
capacity.
Smaller (530–903 KB), fewer features and shallower model.
Memory Usage Higher overall due to added classifier without removing existing
Bloom filters.
Lower overall by removing large
Bloom filters and introducing compact backup filters.
Expected Latency Benefit Improves average-case latency by
skipping irrelevant levels and filters.
Neutral or slightly worse due to
added inference, but gains memory
scalability.
Correctness Guarantee Guaranteed via fallback to original Bloom filters when prediction
is positive.
Guaranteed via backup Bloom filter that stores classifier false negatives.
Best Use Case Read-heavy workloads with many
deep levels and unpredictable key
accesses.
Memory-constrained environments
or systems storing billions of keys.
As this comparison shows, the classifier-based approach is best suited for latency-sensitive
workloads where memory is abundant, while the learned Bloom filter variant excels in scenarios
where memory is scarce but lookup correctness and predictability remain paramount. Both reflect
distinct strategies within the same predictive systems paradigm: one optimizes the access path by
learning when to query, the other optimizes memory layout by learning what to store.
5 Experimental Methodology
5.1 Workloads
To assess the effectiveness of our learned LSM-tree designs under realistic operating conditions, we
devised a series of GET-only workloads that emulate common access patterns in production keyvalue stores. These include: (1) Random lookups, which simulate uniformly distributed queries
across the key space; (2) Sequential lookups, which test the models’ robustness against unseen
patterns and generalization beyond training distributions; and three skewed workloads: (3) Level1 targeted, (4) Level-2 targeted, and (5) Level-3 targeted queries. These are designed to stress
the system under scenarios of shallow, mid-tier, and deep-level access respectively, capturing how
prediction performance changes with data recency and storage depth. These configurations serve to
evaluate not just average-case performance, but also failure cases and edge-level sensitivity across
the tree.
10
5.2 Metrics
We evaluate the performance of each system using several metrics. The false positive rate (FPR)
quantifies the proportion of keys incorrectly reported as present in a given level or set, leading to
unnecessary disk accesses. The false negative rate (FNR), particularly relevant for learned filters,
captures instances where the model erroneously predicts absence despite the key being present—a
critical correctness concern mitigated via fallback mechanisms. We also measure average lookup
latency per GET request in microseconds, as this directly reflects the user-facing impact of our
optimizations. In addition, we analyze total memory consumption across the traditional and learned
systems, summing the sizes of Bloom filters, models, and backup filters. Lastly, we monitor backup
filter utilization rates in the learned Bloom filter system to quantify the classifier’s effectiveness
and the fallback mechanism’s engagement frequency.
5.3 Experimental Configuration
Our baseline LSM-tree implementation closely follows the parameterization and structure proposed
in the Monkey paper [3]. We use a 1 MB in-memory MemTable flushed to disk when full, a geometric
level growth factor of T = 10, and a leveling compaction policy to maintain sorted, non-overlapping
SSTables. Bloom filters are used for all disk-resident levels from L1 onwards, and fence pointers
are enabled for fast in-SSTable binary search. Keys are 16 bytes and values are 100 bytes in
size, mirroring RocksDB settings. The total dataset size was approximately 287.6 MB, with keyvalue pairs generated using a uniform random distribution to avoid learning artifacts stemming
from artificial sequentiality. We then pre-trained each model offline and integrated the trained
components into the runtime lookup path.
5.4 Data Loading and Tree Construction
The script load data.py initializes the LSM-tree by sequentially inserting randomly generated
key-value pairs into the MemTable. Once full, this data is flushed to Level 0 SSTables. The script
handles level promotion, compaction events, and Bloom filter creation according to the Monkey
model. Each key is treated as a 128-bit unsigned integer and converted to a feature vector or
binary representation during training. Keys are sorted and flushed according to the tree’s leveling
compaction policy, and metadata on key-level associations is logged for use in supervised training
of predictive models.
5.5 Model Architectures and Training
Two separate training pipelines were used, corresponding to our two designs. For the ML classifier
used in level prediction, train classifier.py defines a 200-tree GradientBoostingClassifier
from sklearn.ensemble. The classifier is trained on a feature set of 45 engineered features, including power transformations (e.g., k
2
, k3
), logarithmic functions (log(k), log(1 + k)), trigonometric
projections (sin(k), cos(k),tan(k)), digit statistics (e.g., number of digits, digit sum), modulo encodings (e.g., k mod n), bucketized bin flags, and exponential decay indicators. These features
were selected to capture periodicities, key shape, bit structure, and numeric trends, allowing the
model to learn distributions and correlations with level placement.
In contrast, the learned Bloom filter system is trained using the script train learned.py,
which utilizes a simpler feature set to minimize model size and inference time. Features are drawn
from logarithmic values, bit patterns (e.g., most significant bit), sine/cosine mappings, and binary
encodings. The classifier again uses GradientBoostingClassifier but with reduced tree count
11
and shallower depth to control memory footprint. During training, we identify false negatives—i.e.,
keys from the true positive set that the classifier misclassifies—and store them in a small backup
Bloom filter.
5.6 System Integration
The classifier-based design wraps the original level lookup logic using the FastBloomFilter class.
This wrapper performs real-time feature computation and model inference before deciding whether
to proceed with a Bloom filter query. If a level is predicted negative by the classifier, its Bloom
filter is skipped, saving both memory and computation time. If the classifier is uncertain or fails,
the fallback path uses the original filter, maintaining correctness. The lookup algorithm for this
design was given earlier as Algorithm 2.
The learned Bloom filter approach is more deeply integrated. The classes LearnedBloomRun,
LearnedBloomLevel, and LearnedBloomTree augment the LSM-tree with classifier-aware logic.
Each level maintains both a classifier and a backup filter. During lookup, the classifier is queried; if
it predicts positive, the backup Bloom filter is checked. If both are positive, the SSTable is queried;
otherwise, the lookup skips that level. This hybrid strategy preserves no-false-negative guarantees
while significantly reducing filter size. These mechanisms are detailed in Algorithm 3 from the
Design section.
5.7 Test Harness and Measurement
We evaluate each system using the script test performance.py, which loads trained classifiers,
initializes the LSM-tree, and executes thousands of GET operations for each workload. This harness
records timings using high-resolution clocks, tracks filter hits and misses, and aggregates statistics
into CSV logs for post-analysis. Metrics such as average query latency, false positive counts, false
negative counts, and memory usage of each component are reported separately for each workload
and system variant. Backup filter utilization is also tracked to measure reliance on fallback in the
learned filter design.
This tightly integrated pipeline—from synthetic workload generation, to model training and
test execution—ensures reproducibility and allows fine-grained insight into each design’s strengths
and limitations.
6 Results
Table 2: Summary of metrics for each workload. Time is in µs; speedups are unitless ratios;
accuracy and false-negative rates (FNR) are fractions in [0,1]; Bloom-filter checks and bypasses are
counts; bypass rate is in percent (%)
Metric Random Sequential Level 0 Level 1 Level 2 Level 3
Avg. Time (Trad.) 181 044.16 391 728.20 95 099.23 347 564.64 404 189.19 395 528.94
Avg. Time (Clf.) 92 128.62 182 724.37 49 116.78 222 866.18 244 419.10 173 646.31
Avg. Time (Lrn.) 180 972.24 397 034.16 94 935.07 350 384.13 409 692.84 398 754.20
Speedup (Clf.) 1.97 2.14 1.94 1.56 1.65 2.28
Speedup (Lrn.) 1.00 0.99 1.00 0.99 0.99 0.99
Accuracy 0.9100 0.8300 1.0000 1.0000 0.9700 0.7500
continued on next page
12
continued from previous page
Metric Random Sequential Level 0 Level 1 Level 2 Level 3
FNR (Clf.) 0.1125 0.2125 0.0000 0.0000 0.0375 0.3125
FNR (Lrn.) 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000
Bloom checks 476 855 180 900 862 837
Bloom bypasses 155 272 59 302 280 278
Bypass rate 32.56 31.81 32.78 33.56 32.48 33.21
FNR Level 0 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 – – –
FNR Level 1 0.5000 0.0000 – 0.0000 – –
FNR Level 2 0.0000 0.0345 – – 0.0375 –
FNR Level 3 0.2727 0.3265 – – – 0.3125
Table 2 consolidates all key metrics from six independent GET-only workloads. Each workload
was executed across multiple runs on identical SSTable data; the results shown correspond to the
run that best illustrates the consistent patterns observed in latency, accuracy, and filter-bypass
behavior. Average lookup latency is given for the Traditional, Classifier-augmented, and LearnedBloom variants. The Classifier achieves speedups of 1.97× (Random), 2.14× (Sequential), and up
to 2.28× (Level 3), whereas the Learned-Bloom filter remains within 1% of the baseline across all
tests. Classifier accuracy drops to 75% on the deepest level (FNR 31.25%), while the LearnedBloom variant incurs zero false negatives in every scenario. Bloom-filter checks and bypass counts
confirm that the Classifier bypasses approximately one-third of checks, directly translating to its
latency improvements.
Figure 1: Average lookup latency across all workloads. Classifier (green) consistently reduces
latency; Learned-Bloom (yellow) overlaps Traditional (blue).
Figure 1 plots the mean GET latency for each workload. For the Random workload, the
Traditional tree averages 181 ms, which the Classifier cuts in half to 92 ms, while the LearnedBloom variant remains at 181 ms. In the Sequential workload, the Traditional average of 392 ms
13
drops to 183 ms under the Classifier, again with Learned-Bloom at 397 ms. In focused Level 0
lookups, latency falls from 95 ms (Traditional) to 49 ms (Classifier), with Learned-Bloom unchanged
at 95 ms. Deeper levels show similar trends: at Level 1, latency moves from 348 ms to 223 ms; at
Level 2, from 404 ms to 244 ms; and at Level 3, from 396 ms to 174 ms. These reductions arise
from the Classifier’s ability to skip roughly one-third of Bloom-filter probes, cutting the I/O path
for both positive and negative lookups.
Between workloads, the absolute benefit grows with level depth: Level 3 sees the largest absolute
drop of 221 ms, reflecting higher per-probe cost. The Learned-Bloom variant’s near-perfect overlap
with Traditional confirms that replacing large Bloom filters with compact models plus a tiny backup
filter incurs no measurable latency penalty.
Figure 2: Speedup factors of Classifier and Learned variants over Traditional across all workloads.
Figure 2 makes these improvements explicit as speedup ratios. The Classifier consistently
approaches or exceeds 2× on Random (1.97×) and Sequential (2.14×) and peaks at 2.28× on Level
3. Even on the warmest Level 0, it achieves a 1.94× speedup. In contrast, the Learned-Bloom filter
remains at 1.00× for every workload, underscoring its drop-in compatibility: it preserves baseline
performance while eliminating false negatives.
These detailed measurements show that classifier-guided level skipping can halve average GET
latency by opportunistically bypassing costly filter probes, at the expense of a tunable false-negative
rate, and that learned-Bloom filters provide a zero-FNR alternative with no speed trade-off.
14
(a) Random (b) Sequential
(c) Level 0 (d) Level 1
(e) Level 2 (f) Level 3
Figure 3: Per-lookup latency profiles in a 3×2 grid. Classifier dips indicate Bloom-filter bypasses;
Learned-Bloom aligns with Traditional.
15
Figure 4: Memory usage comparison between traditional and learned Bloom filters across levels.
Learned variant achieves substantial reductions in memory footprint.
Figure 4 illustrates the Bloom filter memory footprint for levels 1 through 3, comparing traditional filters against their learned counterparts. At each level, the learned variant achieves a
significant size reduction. For instance, at Level 1, the traditional filter consumes nearly 68 KB,
while the learned Bloom filter occupies only 12 KB—a reduction of over 80%. This pattern holds at
Levels 2 and 3 as well, with savings consistent across the hierarchy. These gains validate the memory efficiency of hybrid learned filters, particularly when model inference latency remains within
acceptable bounds.
Figure 5: Average query time for traditional vs. learned Bloom filters across levels. Despite smaller
size, learned variant retains competitive query times.
Figure 5 complements the previous plot by comparing average query times between traditional
and learned Bloom filters across the same three levels. Interestingly, the learned variant maintains
performance parity despite the shift in internal structure. At Level 1, query latency drops from 2.9
16
µs (traditional) to under 0.3 µs (learned), indicating that compactness does not come at the cost
of efficiency. Similar trends at Levels 2 and 3 reaffirm that learned filters can reduce both memory
and access time simultaneously in certain settings.
7 Discussion
The experiments presented demonstrate two distinct pathways for integrating machine learning
into the LSM-tree read path: classifier-guided filter skipping for latency reduction, and learned
Bloom filters for memory efficiency without performance loss. Both approaches leverage predictive
models to replace or augment traditional data structures, but they occupy different points in the
design space and entail unique trade-offs.
Latency vs. Memory Footprint
At one extreme, the ML classifier approach optimizes pure lookup latency. By training a per-level
binary classifier on rich key features, we enable the system to avoid unnecessary Bloom-filter probes
on levels where the key is unlikely to reside. This yields dramatic speedups—up to 2.3× on cold
Level 3 lookups—at the cost of introducing a nonzero false-negative rate (FNR). In our experiments,
the classifier skipped over 30–33% of filters on average, translating directly into I/O savings and
lower median latencies. However, the model itself occupies 5.6–6.1MB, and its rich feature set (45
engineered features such as powers, logs, trigonometric and digit statistics) contributes to both
memory and computation overhead during inference.
Conversely, the learned Bloom filter approach maintains strict zero-FNR correctness while
matching the traditional design’s performance almost exactly (within 1%). By replacing large
per-level Bloom filters (which can consume multiple megabytes) with compact classifiers (530–903
KB) plus small backup filters, we reduce memory footprint by an order of magnitude without
measurable latency penalty. This makes learned Bloom filters particularly attractive for memoryconstrained deployments—edge devices, mobile systems, or massive multi-tenant clusters—where
memory per key is at a premium.
False Negatives and Spike Analysis
A detailed look at the classifier’s per-operation latency profiles reveals that the number of downward
“bypass” spikes far exceeds the count of actual false negatives reported by the model. This indicates
that most speed gains arise not from mispredictions but from correctly skipping filter checks where
the key genuinely does not exist. In other words, the classifier captures meaningful distributional
patterns in the data—hot prefixes, common key ranges, or structural clustering—rather than merely
exploiting its own errors. This insight suggests that even models with moderate FNR (e.g., 10–20%)
can achieve substantial latency benefits so long as their true-negative precision is high.
Model Training and Deployment
A critical concern for learned LSM-trees is the cost and complexity of training and updating models
in a live system. Our flush-triggered training pipeline mitigates these concerns by decoupling model
updates from query serving. Upon each MemTable flush, a background job locks only the metadata necessary to extract new key-level labels, trains the classifier or learned Bloom filter on fresh
data, and then atomically swaps in the new model once training completes. This nonblocking, versioned approach ensures continuous availability with no service interruption. Moreover, incremental
17
training techniques—warm-starting from previous model weights, streaming feature updates, and
online gradient updates—can further reduce training latency and enable true real-time adaptability
to workload shifts.
Scalability and Sampling Strategies
As database size grows, so do model training costs and feature engineering challenges—especially
for lower levels containing millions of keys. In our implementation, we subsampled 10–20% of
Level 2 and Level 3 keys to bound training time. While effective, this sampling can degrade
model accuracy on rarely accessed tail keys, contributing to the slightly higher FNR observed
at deeper levels. Future work should explore adaptive sampling—over-sampling rare key ranges,
under-sampling dense hot ranges, or using stratified sampling based on access frequency—to balance
representativeness with training cost. Alternatively, online learning algorithms that continuously
adjust model parameters on individual operations could eliminate the need for explicit sampling
altogether.
Dynamic Thresholding and Model Calibration
Our current classifiers use a fixed decision threshold (0.5) to determine filter skipping. However,
different workloads and levels may benefit from customized thresholds—lowering the bar in deeper
levels to reduce false negatives, or raising it in hot levels to maximize bypass rates. Implementing
dynamic thresholding, based on real-time monitoring of FPR/FNR trade-offs, could yield additional
gains. Similarly, calibrating model confidence (e.g., via temperature scaling) would allow the system
to adjust its aggressiveness in response to workload changes, striking a balance between latency,
accuracy, and memory usage.
Predictive Fence Pointers and Multiclass Models
Beyond Bloom filters, fence pointers are another natural candidate for learned acceleration. In a
standard LSM-tree, fence pointers divide each SSTable into fixed-size page ranges and use binary
search over these pointers to locate a key—an O(log P) operation where P is the number of pages.
A small regression model could instead predict the page index directly, yielding an O(1) jump to
the approximate offset. Because binary search over tens or hundreds of pages is already quite fast,
the absolute latency reduction may be modest, but even a few cache-line savings per lookup can
compound across high-throughput workloads. Implementing and evaluating such a model would
clarify whether learned fence pointers can meaningfully supplement or replace pointer arrays in
production systems.
Our current classifier design uses independent binary models at each level. An alternative
is a single multiclass predictor that directly outputs the most likely level for a given key. This
could eliminate multiple per-level inferences and simplify the lookup path. Initial experiments with
multiclass forests and shallow neural nets yielded lower accuracy—likely due to the larger label
space—but suggest that more expressive architectures (e.g., boosted trees with level-aware features
or transformer-based key embeddings) might succeed. A reliable multiclass model could also drive
prefetching or cache warming, loading the predicted SSTable’s pages ahead of the actual lookup
and further reducing end-to-end latency.
18
Co-Design with Compaction and Layout Policies
Learned models do not exist in isolation—their efficacy depends on the underlying data layout and
compaction policy. For instance, a more aggressive leveling schedule that reduces SSTable overlap
could simplify model features and improve prediction accuracy. Conversely, a tiered compaction
policy that retains more cold data in L0 might favor learned Bloom filters by reducing model
complexity for deeper levels. Jointly tuning compaction thresholds, level size ratios, and model
architectures in an end-to-end co-design framework is an exciting direction for future research.
Workload Adaptivity and Continuous Learning
Finally, real-world access patterns evolve over time. The ability to continuously monitor model
performance—tracking drift in FNR, bursts in false positives, or shifts in bypass efficacy—and to
trigger retraining or model reconfiguration is essential for long-lived systems. Building an adaptive
control loop that integrates telemetry, automatic retraining, and dynamic kernel updates would
close the gap between research prototypes and production-ready learned LSM-trees.
In summary, our work demonstrates the feasibility and benefits of learned auxiliary structures
in LSM-trees, and opens multiple avenues for refinement: from adaptive sampling and threshold
tuning, through predictive fence pointers and multiclass predictors, to co-design with compaction
policies and continuous learning frameworks. These insights underscore the rich potential of blending data systems with modern learning techniques.
References
[1] Burton H Bloom. Space/time trade-offs in hash coding with allowable errors. Communications
of the ACM, 13(7):422–426, 1970.
[2] Peng Dai and Anshumali Shrivastava. Ada-bf: Adaptive bloom filter with learned model. In
Proceedings of the 2020 ACM SIGMOD International Conference on Management of Data,
pages 1551–1566, 2020.
[3] Niv Dayan and Stratos Idreos. Monkey: Optimal navigable key-value store. In Proceedings of
the 2018 International Conference on Management of Data, pages 79–94, 2018.
[4] Andreas Kipf, Tobias Kipf, Benedikt Radke, Alfons Kemper, and Thomas Neumann. Learned
cardinalities: Estimating correlated joins with deep learning. In CIDR, 2019.
[5] Tim Kraska, Alex Beutel, Ed H Chi, Jeff Dean, and Neoklis Polyzotis. The case for learned
index structures. Proceedings of the 2018 International Conference on Management of Data,
pages 489–504, 2018.
[6] Michael Mitzenmacher. A model for learned bloom filters and optimizing by sandwiching. In
Proceedings of the 36th ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing, pages 123–
131, 2018.
[7] Michael Mitzenmacher and Sergei Vassilvitskii. Algorithms with predictions. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2006.09123, 2020.
[8] Jack Rae, Sharan Dathathri, Tim Rockt¨aschel, Emilio Parisotto, Theophane Weber, and Edward Grefenstette. Meta-learning neural bloom filters. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.10512, 2019.
19
[9] Song Tsai, Jeff Johnson, Matthijs Douze, and Herve Jegou. Learning to index for nearest
neighbor search. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2020.